>> WILLIAM HENRY: What if a
painting could connect you
to a divine light
that transforms you?
>> CLARE HENRY:
Today on "Arcanum,"
transfiguration icons
and the holy light.
>> WILLIAM: Welcome, everyone.
I'm William Henry.
>> CLARE: And I'm Clare Henry.
>> WILLIAM: Today we are going
to explore sacred mirrors,
specifically how certain works
of art called transfiguration
icons are considered sacred
mirrors and even portals
to other realms.
>> CLARE: Let's talk about
mirrors for a moment.
Mirrors help us navigate
our everyday world.
>> WILLIAM: A rear-view
mirror in our car helps us see
what's coming.
Mirrors placed at the corner
of buildings or streets
help us to see what's ahead.
The mirror is a threshold.
>> CLARE: We stand before a
mirror before leaving our home
or car to see what we will
look like or how we will appear
for what is ahead.
>> WILLIAM: As in the
story of Snow White,
who famously asked the mirror,
mirror, mirror, on the wall,
who in this realm is
fairest of them all?
The mirror never lies.
>> CLARE: The symbolism
associated with the mirror has
its roots in the
very distant past.
The fact is no matter what
your spiritual background is,
the idea of the mirror is an
important spiritual symbol
and tool.
>> WILLIAM: Some of the oldest
drawings found on temple walls
and papyrus scrolls depict
images of the Egyptian gods
gazing into hand-held mirrors.
The Arcanum is traced
to the Egyptian divine
being Thoth, who stands
before his mirror.
>> CLARE: The mirror also has
an esoteric or mystic meaning.
Many ancient people
regarded mirrors
as mysterious and magical
tools to view spiritual guides
and receive messages
from beyond as well.
>> WILLIAM: The mirror
is a symbol of physical
and spiritual reflection.
Just as a mirror can show us how
we presently physically appear
and what may be behind
or ahead of us, so too
does our spiritual mirror
reflect our past actions.
>> CLARE: Take a
look around you.
It is the consequence
of your actions
that have created what
you see around you.
What do you see when you look
into your spiritual mirror?
What people, places, and
events are behind you?
>> WILLIAM: By gazing
in the spiritual mirror,
we are looking directly at what
we have created for ourselves.
>> CLARE: Now that's
a bitter pill.
What if, upon reflecting
on what we see,
we don't like where we've
been, what is coming,
or where in fact we are going?
What do we do?
>> WILLIAM: Fortunately, the
symbolism of the mirror offers
answers.
First, the key piece of
wisdom about the mirror
is that it only reflects
what is currently true.
This means you can
change your course.
We can change what we are
contemplating, meditating,
or reflecting on.
>> CLARE: Second, in order for
a mirror to cast a reflection,
it requires light.
And symbolically, light
represents illumination,
enlightenment, and wisdom.
>> WILLIAM: Taking a cue from
early Christian alchemists,
they believed you could create
sacred mirrors called icons
that could assist us in
drawing down a light or power
of transformation.
Can images really help us
to draw in divine energy
and even to transform us?
>> CLARE: Next, in William's
feature investigation,
we will investigate
transfiguration icons and how
they do just that.
>> WILLIAM: The great Scottish
symbolist and mythologist
Harold Bayley once wrote that
"mysticism has universally
taught that every man and woman
has within themselves the germs
or seeds of divinity and
that by self-conquest--"
or perhaps self-knowledge,
self-awakening "--these sparks
of heaven may be fanned into a
flame, the flame into a fire,
the fire into a star,
and the star into a sun."
To me, that's the
eternal progression
that we're all
evolving toward, to go
from human to celestial
being or star being.
In Western civilization,
Judeo-Christian civilization
or culture, Jesus, of course,
is the ultimate exemplar
of this transformation.
He in his life demonstrated
the way or path
to go from human, man, to
star being or celestial being.
And in these images of
the Transfiguration,
we see him enfolded
within the light that
appears to be that of a star.
The Transfiguration of Jesus
refers to his transformation
or shapeshifting into a shining
cosmic being, a light being,
and back into flesh,
one of the most
extraordinary miracles
of Jesus' teaching.
And in this example
here, we see him
with his bright white
garment of light,
enfolded within
this star energy,
demonstrating this
transformation.
The Transfiguration
of Jesus is one
of the most transcendent
yet bizarrely neglected
events ever recorded in
myth or sacred tradition.
Perhaps this is because it
sounds mystical, too mystical,
in the extreme,
even preposterous,
like the story of a genie
coming out of a bottle.
But over and over again
in the Gnostic text
Jesus emphasized
that he, in fact,
was a celestial or a star being.
In the Revelation
of the Magi, we
see the Magi awaiting not a
star but rather following a star
child, as the text
describes Jesus.
We see him here manifesting
in the Earth plane
as a celestial or star being.
In this other example here
of Jesus with the star child,
we see the Magi following not
the star but the star child
or star man, a
completely different take
on this nativity idea.
Midway through his
ministry, Jesus
took three disciples,
Peter, James, and John,
and slipped off secretly
to a high mountain
on the borderland between
the human and divine.
He had something to show
them, something extraordinary.
Suddenly, says Mark,
Jesus becomes radiant.
His clothing becomes
bright as lightning.
He glistens.
And suddenly Elijah
and Moses manifest,
as if out of thin
air, and perhaps
they too are illuminated
or shimmering,
translucent just like Jesus.
In Eastern art, we see the
Transfiguration portrayed
in this way with
Moses and Elijah
on either side of Jesus, who
is portrayed as a star being.
Perhaps like a moment out
of the movie "Cocoon,"
he has pulled back his flesh
and revealed his true self.
In fact, what he's revealing
in the Gnostic sense
is the true self of all of us.
We are all, in fact, celestial
or star children temporarily
inhabiting the world
of flesh and matter.
The disciples and
Jesus discuss events
to come in Jerusalem, the
crucifixion, resurrection,
and ascension.
And through terrified
eyes, the disciples
watch as their friend,
their brother indeed,
suddenly morphs right
before their very eyes.
They fall prostrate before
Jesus in utter fear and terror
of what they have
just witnessed.
God speaks to the disciples
from a cloud telling them
that everything is OK.
And then finally Jesus
delivers the key message
to the disciples telling them
to rise and not be afraid.
I believe what he's
saying is for them
to elevate their consciousness,
to raise their vibration
to match that of Jesus, to match
that of this wondrous celestial
or star being within us.
He's calling them to
transform and to acknowledge
their true selves
and to manifest
their full human potential.
The earliest known
version, in fact
the standard depiction
of the Transfiguration,
is found in an apse mosaic
at St. Catharine's monastery
in the Sinai.
It dates to around 540 AD.
And what we see here
is Jesus enfolded
within this blue cosmic egg,
radiating seven rays of light.
He's, in a sense, the original
Lord of the Seven Rays,
if you will, a very important
distinction in the wisdom
tradition.
So after that time, other
artists and icon makers
began to adopt
this idea of Jesus
as the celestial or star man.
And this is what we see in the
Transfiguration icons is where
he's on the top of
the mountain, Moses
and Elijah on either
side, typically
in this radiant cloud, which is
actually going to be something
else, as we'll see in a moment,
radiating this immense divine
light or wisdom that is
capable of transforming humans
on contact, as in the
story of the disciples.
This is a favorite
example here from Russia.
We see Jesus in the cosmic
egg, the cosmic egg of light,
radiating three rays of light,
which is extremely important
as well in the
mystery tradition,
and we'll talk about
that momentarily.
We see the disciples
in fear or terror
being challenged to raise
their vibration, Moses
and Elijah on either side.
So these become the
prototype, if you will,
for all images of the
Transfiguration of Jesus.
This is the basic set up.
And we have to imagine
that Moses and Elijah must
be at a similar frequency
or vibration as Jesus.
They must have come
from another realm
and suddenly manifested
in the world of matter.
This is a favorite image.
I took this photo in the
Coptic Christian church
in Aswan, Egypt.
The reason I liked it is because
it very tastefully but subtly
includes the
Egyptian nemes crown,
the crown of the
pharaohs, hinting
at the Egyptian or esoteric
origins of the Transfiguration
teaching.
As usual, Moses and
Elijah are on either side.
And once again, Jesus
is in the cosmic egg,
the light-filled egg,
radiating three rays.
Now why are the three
rays are important?
Here's the reason.
When you go into the Egyptian
hieroglyphic dictionary, EA
Wallis Budge's dictionary, you
look up a very powerful word
called aakhut,
which means beings
of light, wise instructed
folk, the light god,
the great light, the sun.
And what we notice is that
the hieroglyph of the aakhu,
which also means to shine, to
be bright, splendid, glorious,
excellent, good, is
actually three rays
radiating from the
image of the sun,
the S-U-N. When we put
that beside the image
of the Transfiguration
with Jesus
in the cosmic egg radiating
three rays, what do you know?
It's the same symbol.
Are they hinting
here that Jesus is
part of the aakhut,
the beings of light,
the wise instructed folk?
This is a very
important question,
because according to
Egyptian tradition
it was the aakhut who
built the Great Pyramid
complex on the Giza Plateau.
In Budge's hieroglyphic
dictionary,
the following additional
definitions of aakhu
are provided, to be bright,
to be excellent, to be wise,
or to be instructed.
What exactly are the
aakhu instructed in?
How about transformation?
How about the
alchemical metamorphosis
of a human into a
celestial being or a star
being, a wise being of light?
That's what we're
talking about here.
As Graham Hancock
and Robert Bauval
explain in their book "The
Message of the Sphinx,"
the hieroglyphs
of aakhu can also
mean transfigured beings,
shining ones, shining beings,
again suggesting
that Jesus is part
of this tribe of cosmic beings
who came to Earth with a very
specific teaching, that is, how
humans can morph into celestial
or star beings.
Moving forward into
the 12th century,
we see this beautiful mosaic
where Jesus is, once again,
in the cosmic egg, seven
rays radiating from his body.
He is the Lord of
the Seven Rays.
I particularly like this one
because it brings forward
this blue light.
The idea is is that we can't
perceive the divine realm,
and so what these
artists would do
is they would show the light
radiating inward, going
from light to dark, and the dark
hinting at the imperceptible
to human consciousness.
It's dark or hidden to us.
Therefore we're going inward
from light into the dark realm.
And Jesus, in fact, comes
out of this hidden realm
into the light in
the Transfiguration.
Another favorite is Fra
Angelico's powerful, powerful
"Transfiguration"
in Florence, Italy,
where Jesus, once again,
is in the cosmic egg.
He's in the cosmic egg of light.
The disciples are terrified.
We have Moses and Elijah,
as usual, on either side.
And he's welcoming us.
He's opening his heart to us
and radiating this light to us,
beaming it to us, in
fact, and asking us,
challenging us to rise
and not be afraid,
to embrace this next
level within ourselves.
There are numerous names
for this bright shining
white garment of light that
Jesus is dressed in here.
It's called the robe of
light, the robe of sanctity,
the robe of glory, the shining
garment, the garment of light,
the rainbow body of light,
and also my favorite,
a term from ancient Iran,
the beaming garment.
I like this term because
it suggests a pun.
It's called the beaming
garment because when
Jesus puts on this
garment of light
he's beaming or radiating light.
But as we'll see in a moment,
in the Star Trek vernacular
beaming means to dissolve
ourselves into light
and then to recompose
ourselves at another location.
And I believe that
that is also what's
happening in the Transfiguration
is that Jesus is demonstrating
his ability to dissolve
himself into light,
beam himself through the cosmos,
and then morph back into flesh
once again, a really
powerful idea.
The Greek word that is used to
describe this garment of light
is exousia.
It means authority,
jurisdiction, liberty, power,
right to act, ability,
privilege, capacity,
and strength.
These are all the
attributes that we
gain by matching our vibration
with Jesus', of not being
afraid of our potential
but rather to rise
and match our frequency
as close as we
can to these celestial beings.
And in so doing, we gain
true authority, true liberty,
true capacity, and true strength
that cannot be taken away from
us.
That's the message
of the Gnostics.
Because they know of beings
out there in our world, Archons
and other beings,
that seek to take
our divine spark that we
seek to fan into a flame
and into a star and into
a sun and prevent us
from attaining this
ultimate liberty and power.
And the only way to
combat these beings,
whether they be celestial
beings or earthly powers that
seek to prevent us
from enjoying liberty,
is to raise our vibration and
put on our garment of light.
This is another reason,
again, for answering the call
to Transfiguration.
So where did Jesus get
this garment of light?
Well, the Bible tells
us that he got it
from John the Baptist, his
cousin, the Essene mystic
John the Baptist,
who is shown here
baptizing Jesus in
the River Jordan.
And we notice the
angel is waiting
to give Jesus his cloak
or garment of light.
It's after this baptism when
Jesus gets the garment that he
then goes and begins
performing his miracles.
So we ask a question.
From where did John the
Baptist get the cloak?
Ah, very good question.
It's claimed he was the
reincarnation of the Old
Testament prophet
Elijah, who was last
seen ascending into the
heavens in a whirlwind.
A vortex, a portal, a stargate?
Mm hmm.
That's what we're
talking about here.
And as John is ascending on
his chariot of fire, which
is symbolic of his
celestial vehicle,
he turns to his priest
Elisha and transmits to him
his holy garment, his mantle
of light, the very same garment
that John will then
transmit to Jesus.
Here we're looking at a
classically rendered icon
of Elijah ascending into
heaven in his fiery chariot,
as described in
the Book of Kings.
And as he departs,
he drops his mantle
to his successor, Elisha, who
is shown on the lower left.
So here's John in his
celestial chariot ascending.
He has no need any longer now
for this transmittable garment
of light, and so he offers
it to his priest, Elisha,
so that then this
tradition can continue.
To me, this suggests
something very important
about this garment of light.
It may be an actual
physical garment.
But more than likely,
what it really is
is a transmittable
vibration that
is attained by these
beings that then they
can impart to other individuals.
And that, I propose, is
what's happening here.
I happened to be in
the baptistery in San
Marco in Venice, Italy,
and I snapped this photo
of the angel delivering that
garment to John the Baptist.
That could be Elijah
that's in fact doing this,
but the key is that
in Christian tradition
it's believed that
John the Baptist is
in fact the
reincarnation of Elijah,
so of course he's
going to pick up
where he left off in
his previous life.
He's going to go get that
vibration that gives him
capacity, strength, power, and
authority, as well as liberty.
So John reacquires the
vibration of the garment.
And then what does he do?
Now he's prepared
once he puts it on
to then baptize
his cousin Jesus.
So John is now
wearing the garment,
and he's now transmitting
the vibration of that garment
to Jesus in the baptism.
And so we see the dove
descending, the star energy,
the cosmic vibration descending,
and then afterward now Jesus
is clothed in that
garment light,
and off he goes to
perform the miracles.
The very first thing he does
once he acquires that garment
is hike the disciples up
to the top of Mount Tabor
and reveal his
newfound capability.
Extraordinary isn't it?
As alchemist
Marie-Louise von Franz
observes in "Aurora Consurgens,"
when the neophyte achieved
this inner transformation
and rebirth,
they were given a new heavenly
garment or celestial garment.
The archetypal image of
the coat of many colors
or many-colored garment,
the cloak of light,
played a central role in
the ancient mystery schools.
We'll talk about that
in a later episode.
For now, we want to note
that this garment represented
the initiate's qualification
or seal, referred
to as their solificatio,
for which reason
is that it's described as
a light or a seal of light.
It seals the body in light.
It protects us.
In fact, the Gnostic
texts tell us
that the Archons and
the powers can't even
see us when we're wearing
this garment of light.
More motivation for us to adopt
this teaching today and absorb
this light or
frequency or vibration
as a way to protect
ourselves from the powers
that be that many believe are
running out of control today.
Jesus' Transfiguration
is, of course,
associated with radiance,
whiteness, light, fire,
all three alchemical elements
being closely related
to frequency, vibration,
electromagnetic energies,
but also a ring,
because the word
ring is a pun on
the word vibration.
So literally Jesus is ringing or
singing at a higher vibration.
And perhaps this is
what the icon artists
are trying to convey here
with the light or vibration
manifesting around Jesus'
body is that he is radiating
this electromagnetic frequency
or, indeed, this sound
or vibration that
transforms us on contact.
Those closest to
Jesus were told we're
able to attune to the
electromagnetic energies
of this lightbody and
interact with Jesus.
The idea is that we have to
raise our vibration in order
to perceive these beings.
And the disciples are
given kind of a bum rap
in traditional Christianity.
They're thought of as kind
of these dimwit farmers
and fishermen and shepherds.
Come on.
To hang out with Jesus
in his inner circle,
they had to be some
extraordinary beings.
And in my view, what
they went through
is a process of
initiation that enabled
them to awaken their
consciousness so that they
could even perceive these
higher vibrational beings, Moses
and Elijah and
Jesus, to begin with.
And that prepared
them for this moment.
After the Transfiguration, Jesus
returns to normal human form,
flesh and blood, and they
walk back down the mountain
together.
Jesus tells the
disciples, hey, I'd
appreciate it if you'd keep
quite of what you've just seen.
In fact, they call this
the Messianic Secret.
For some reason, Jesus
didn't want the word out
that he was a celestial
being, a star being,
and had this
incredible capability
to peel back the flesh
and reveal himself
as being of immense
light and, indeed, love.
Matthew and Mark
called this event
the Transfiguration
or the metamorphosis.
The word transfigured comes
from the Greek verb metamorphoo,
meaning changed in
form or transformed.
It's the source of our
English word metamorphosis.
It's a change of form, like a
caterpillar into a butterfly
or a tadpole into a frog.
They go through a metamorphosis
or a change of form.
Literally they shapeshift.
Psyche, it happens, is the
Greek word for butterfly.
And psyche, the anima or soul,
was symbolized or represented
by the butterfly.
So we see this confluence
of symbols and words
coming together here.
And so, in a sense, what
we're looking at here
is Jesus as the
butterfly being in a way.
And I like to think
of it this way.
I once saw a cartoon of
two caterpillars looking up
at the butterfly
saying, you'll never
get me up in one
of those things.
And essentially that's
our core predicament.
We don't believe that we can
morph into a Christ-like being.
We don't believe we can put
on this garment of light
and attain authority, power,
jurisdiction, liberty,
capacity, and strength.
Therefore we don't.
Why don't we?
In my view, the answer is
our culture and our religion.
How dare you think
you can even come
close to matching the vibration
of a being of light and love
like Jesus?
That's essentially the
core message of the Church.
We're supposed to fear this.
But actually the
Gnostic message is
is that we are to become this.
In fact, this is the
only way, they teach,
that we're going to
get off this rock.
So in my view, with
all due respect,
our goal and
objective is to learn
to morph as Jesus taught, to
connect with this divine light
or love, and attain this
capacity and strength on behalf
of the divine realm.
We seek this vibration
not for our glory
but for the glory of
God, for the glory
of the cosmos and the universe.
We are, in a sense,
the caterpillar
engaging in the butterfly.
Do you think a caterpillar
needs to go to school,
take a motivational
seminar to learn
how to become a butterfly?
No.
It's hardwired within us.
And I believe that
the metamorphosis
and transfiguration
into light beings
is also hardwired into our DNA.
How do we turn the key?
How do we start the engine
that's already within us?
Ah, now we're talking the
questions and the language
of the icon makers,
because they proposed
a very simple but powerful
answer to that question.
In Transfiguration
images, the cloud
Jesus is portrayed in front
of is often an open gate.
And what we'll see is that it's
sometimes filled with stars
or composed of various
geometric shapes,
such as an almond-shaped
mandorla or vesica
piscis, which is symbolic
of a gateway, that's
also filled with stars.
So let's look at this Russian
example of the Transfiguration.
Jesus is wearing the
garment of light.
He's in this cloud?
It doesn't look like any
cloud I've ever seen.
This looks like a gateway.
And look, it's
filled with stars,
indicating to me
that perhaps what
Jesus is, in fact, standing
in front of is a stargate?
How about that?
What if, in the
Transfiguration, Jesus
puts on that garment of
light and then demonstrates
a two-step process.
Put on the garment of
light, and then you
have the capacity
to open the gateway
or portal to the divine realm.
Now we're talking.
Now we're inside
the deep metaphysics
of esoteric Christianity.
This is what the
Gnostics talked about,
and this is what must have
been on the minds of these icon
makers.
They are demonstrating this
two-step process for us.
We raise our vibration.
First we overcome fear.
We embrace the love of God
and the universe and the love
within us.
This assists us in
raising our vibration.
And once we have our
vibration in place,
now we're prepared to open the
gateway to the divine realm
and interact with the
other divine beings.
So did Jesus in fact open
a portal or a stargate
at the Transfiguration?
I call this stargate metaphysics
or stargate Christianity.
Because in my view, this
what it's all about.
It's all about our preparation.
Remember, in the
Old Testament we
had been kicked out
of the Garden of Eden
when the Old Testament
god Yahweh got
upset with Adam and
Eve for acquiring
the wisdom of the serpent.
He evicts humankind from
Eden and does two things.
He creates a gate
at the east of Eden,
places seraphim angels on
either side of that gate,
and a flashing, flaming
sword in the center
and forbids us to
access that gate.
But then he does something
else that most people
have forgotten about.
He made for humankind
coats of skin.
Now traditional Bible teachers
will tell you, oh, yeah, that
must have been some kind
of calf skin or deer
skin or some other animal skin.
But actually, in the
esoteric tradition,
the Gnostic tradition,
they will teach you
that we're talking
about our flesh
as the coats of skin
that were created for us.
Because the belief is we're
originally beings of light,
and we're now walking around
in the world of matter
in these suits.
And ultimately, our goal
is to dissolve this back
into our original
essence, light and love,
and then access that
gate to paradise.
Alternately, this gate
that we're describing here
is composed of concentric rings
in Transfiguration art that
indicate depth as
well as dimension
but also vibration,
concentric rings
indicating sound waves or
vibration radiating outward.
Today we use terms such
as stargate and wormhole
to denote such holes
in space and time.
So let's look at this
image from Byzantium
here of the
Transfiguration, Moses,
Elijah on either side, Jesus and
the concentric rings radiating
light.
And it looks to me like he's
got some kind of problem
with Elijah.
Maybe Elijah said,
hey, Jesus, yeah,
humans morph into light beings?
And Jesus is like, well,
here's the power symbol for you
right here, Elijah.
Take it for what it's worth.
I realize that in
ancient Byzantium
the meaning of
this finger symbol
might have had a different
meaning than it does today.
But still it kind of works
on that level, doesn't it?
Another favorite
example, this one
also coming from Russia,
Jesus in the stargate,
holding the scroll of the law,
in the bright white garment
of light.
He's in the stargate.
And what happens here is
that this one, for me,
triggers that what we
must be describing here
is a change in form,
a metamorphosis that
begins from within.
It begins by accessing our
ladder, tower, or stairway
to heaven within us,
our chakra system.
And remember, we count the
chakras one, two, three, four,
five, six, seven.
All good children go to heaven.
That's the children's
song we all grow up with,
and now we know
the inner meaning
of that children's song.
We're all climbing this
mountain of transfiguration,
which is really the
mountain of initiation.
Each of us is on the path.
We're at some level of
raising our vibration.
And ultimately, we're
all going to one day
reach the top of that mountain
where we can see into the star
realms and connect with the
celestial or star beings.
And this is the primary
message of the Transfiguration
is to rise and not be
afraid on this path.
The object, of course, in
the alchemical tradition
is to get past the
gatekeeper and find
the hidden philosopher's
stone, which,
as we have indicated in
the episode of that name,
is actually our pineal
gland, and the mountain
that we're climbing is our
rod of power within us.
So the alchemists
were very well aware
of this idea of metamorphosis
or transfiguration,
which they symbolized
by the phoenix.
And at the top of the alchemical
mountain in this instance
is, of course,
Hermes or Thoth, who
is the great originator
of the Arcanum tradition.
Apart from being taught
in the Hogwarts school
in the Harry Potter
universe, the transfiguration
is basically utterly
neglected in the West, which
predominantly worships images of
the bloodied and tortured Jesus
rather than an image
of transcendence.
That's our culture.
Thousands of Christian
churches around America
will show you images
of the bloodied
and beat up Jesus
and completely omit
the idea of the Transfiguration.
Perhaps it's just too mystical,
too intense for most people
to embrace.
However, in the mystical East
of the first six centuries
AD and later magnificently from
the 14th to the 17th century,
astonishingly energetic
and elegantly beautiful
images of
transfiguration of Jesus
levitating and radiating light,
light radiating from his body
entranced the imagination
and empowered people
to actually activate this
capability within ourselves.
These masterpieces were actually
considered a visual counterpart
to the written gospels.
Remember, most people
couldn't read at this time,
but they sure could
look at an image.
And that's why these images
were revered as holy.
The Gospels themselves
communicate the biblical truth
through words.
The icons communicated through
visible forms, through symbols,
and, indeed, through
vibration and the energy
of the icons themselves.
And both were considered equally
valid modes of revelation.
And this was the primary
principal teaching
that we're talking about here
is that people would have
these panel icons
in their homes,
and they were able to
access the divine realm
through these panel icons.
In the magical alchemical
imagination of the icon makers,
these images were designed
to be actual doors or portals
to another world.
Our world and the spiritual
world, the divine realm,
are opened to each
other through the icon.
And you can imagine why the
Western Church was threatened
by this, because they wanted
to put a pope or a priest
in between you and
the divine realm.
They wanted to put
words you couldn't
read in between you
and the divine realm.
The icon makers said, just
contemplate, meditate,
and reflect on this image.
Look at it and absorb
the energy of it
and become it and open the
door to the divine realm.
William Blake in the early
1800s adopted this concept
in a beautiful way.
And it's worth bringing his
view into this equation here.
This is "Albion," representing
fallen humanity, who
is being revived by the
picture of the Redeemer.
"Awake, awake, O sleeper
of the land of shadows.
Wake, expand.
I am in you and you in me,
mutual and love divine,"
wrote William Blake,
who was also a poet.
The message here is that
Albion becomes what he sees.
That's the key message
of the icon makers.
And here Blake is following
Paracelsian doctrine,
which simply means that what a
human thinks he is or she is.
If we think we are
transfiguring and ascending
as we are looking
at an icon, we are.
That's such a simple
mode of revelation,
and this is why it
was readily adopted
by the icon makers and great
painters like Botticelli,
William Blake, and others who we
are discussing in this series.
So here's the idea is that
these transfiguration icons were
specially created to create
or enable a visceral encounter
with a holy being or to make
present a spiritual energy.
They are a form
of visual alchemy
that can help is in our
own Transfiguration,
if that's your path.
How many times have you
been to a movie where
you had that visceral connection
with something that you saw?
It's incredibly powerful.
And in the time
before television,
this was the mode
of communication
that enabled that
visceral experience
to be transmitted from
one person to another.
The concept of the
mirror actually
explains the technology
of the icons.
The word icon comes
from the Greek word
eikon, which means image.
And in the New Testament,
the Greek word image
also means likeness
and portrait.
So this is an image, a
likeness, a portrait,
but it's also a portal as well.
Another term we might
use is projection.
The Old and New Testaments
use the word image
to describe all of us being
made in the image of the God
who made us.
And in a sense, we are mirror
images or icons of the Creator.
Now that's a really
heady concept
to wrap our minds around,
but it explains to us
how we can interact with an
image, and it influences us.
We are just simply
images engaging
with the image of a
divine being and absorbing
the energy of that image,
very simple concept
and very powerful.
And all we have to do is get
our left brain out of the way,
open up our right brain, and we
too can receive that vibration.
When used as a verb, the word
mirror means to send back
or to form an image of,
to image or reflect.
To mirror is also to reflect,
and reflection, of course,
produces insight
or enlightenment.
So you see the multi-level
puns that are in effect here
with the mirror.
We engage with the
mirror, an image,
and this causes us to reflect.
And then, after we
reflect on the image,
especially that of
the Transfiguration,
then we reflect that
light into our world.
See how this works?
The icon itself is a two-way
mode of communication.
We bring the energy into us,
we get insight from the image,
then we reflect on
that insight, and then
we reflect it in our lives
and radiate it into our world.
Just as Alice ponders
what the world
is like on the other side of
a mirror and, to her surprise,
is able to pass through to
experience the parallel world,
a person who became adept at
mirroring Jesus' experience
of transfiguration could reflect
this process in their own body.
What an utterly beautiful
and powerful method for us
to raise our vibration and, in
fact, to transform our world.
Just imagine if all the
Christian churches in the world
took down all those bloody
Jesuses or the images
of the bloody and beaten
Jesus and instead replaced it
with images like
this of transcendence
and reflection of light.
That would be an
enormous service
that would be
provided for our world
because, as Clare will
show us momentarily,
where our mind goes,
the biology follows.
That's the key equation here.
So as we saturate our mind
with these images of light
and transcendence, our
biology begins to follow.
Isn't that a
beautiful system here?
Transfiguration icons
are sacred images
that are believed to be charged
with a spiritual power that
is capable of transforming us.
Fascinatingly, icons
of Transfiguration
or metamorphosis were considered
these two-way channels
of transformative energy.
They are mirrors and gateways to
other realms, the divine realm.
In this way, a
Transfiguration icon
is the same as a computer
icon we're all familiar with
and a highway sign.
It's concentrated
information that
symbolizes or points to
something beyond itself.
So here's a screen
shot of my desktop.
Here's icons of various images
and programs and documents
that are on my desktop.
And I know that when I click
on one of these images,
something really powerful
is going to happen.
When I click on
the computer icon,
it opens into a phenomenal
inner world that I can't see
and hardly can fathom that
brings about enormous potential
in something called a program,
a set of coded instructions
that enables me to do work.
The program's icon is
not the program itself,
but it symbolizes it
and opens the way to it.
I propose this is how
the icons work as well.
And for example, when
we see a corporate logo,
such as a blue
apple here, we know
that if we click
on that logo, it
represents thousands
of people who
are building some of the most
amazing products on the planet.
A kind of fun, anecdotal
story here, in 1998
I wrote a book
called "Blue Apples"
about the mysteries
of Southern France.
The blue apple is the alchemical
symbol for the impossible.
It doesn't exist until you think
of it, until you imagine it.
Then you can make it so.
Well, I knew that the
Beatles and Apple Computer
were in a huge
lawsuit over control
of the icon of the
apple for an instrument
or a device that can play music.
The Beatles sued
Apple and said, hey,
you can't use the
apple logo if you're
going to create a
device that plays music.
And Apple at that
time said, well,
we don't have any plans to get
into the music business, which
is kind of funny now
considering they've completely
taken over the music business.
So I wrote a letter
to Steve Jobs,
and I said, dear
Steve, I'm writing
a book called "Blue Apples."
I know you guys are really
touchy about the Apple logo.
I'm just wanting to make
sure that it's OK for me
to use this icon
or logo in my book.
A couple weeks later,
I get a letter back
from Apple's legal department,
and they say, dear, Mr. Henry,
we have no problem with
you using the blue apple
in your book and in
your presentations.
Apple's logo, in fact, is
a rainbow-colored apple.
It has nothing to do
with the blue apple.
It wasn't long after that
that I bought a new MacBook,
and I had some
technical difficulty,
and I called their
customer service line.
And the operator at the other
end said, what I want you to do
is to go up in the left-hand
corner of your screen
and click on the blue apple.
I told him the story
I just told you,
and it kind of
went over his head.
But you get the idea, that
the blue apple does exist.
And in fact, it represents this
powerful, powerful machine.
And later Apple adopted the
slogan "think different."
And that's the
message of the icons.
We have to think different.
And if we can imagine it, we can
actually live it and become it.
That's the subtle but
powerful technology
we're talking about here.
Because the idea is that
the materials of the image
become a channel or a bridge,
a gate between two worlds.
In fact, to an
orthodox Christian,
the images are a
medium through which
the energy of the
Transfiguration moment
can be channeled like
a two-way mirror,
and devotees could enter the
cosmic realm through the icon.
In fact, when the
icons were made,
alchemy was the normal way of
interacting with the world.
Everything was viewed as in
the process of transmutation
or changing into something else,
like the acorn into the oak,
simultaneously unveiling
and being reborn.
Everything was viewed
as transmutable,
including the human
body, which was viewed
as a pupal form of an ascended
spiritual being, usually
symbolized by a butterfly
but also by the phoenix.
The alchemists' quest for
the Philosopher's Stone,
or Arcanum, begins
with the realization
that everything can be
transformed or transmuted.
Thoughts can become things,
lead can become gold,
and a human can
become a star being.
So let me just
explain how this can
work to activate
our imagination.
What we're looking at here is
actually 12 lines on the screen
that are projected into
your imagination as a cube,
in fact a cube that
is three-dimensional.
And the idea is is that
as we look at this cube,
it's flipping back and forth.
We look at it from
one perspective,
it looks like we're
looking into it.
Then we shift our
perspective, it
looks like we're looking
down into the cube,
and a completely
different box appears.
The idea is is that
everything out here
is brought to life
in our imagination,
just like this cube.
Whether it be my remote control,
the television you're watching,
the chair you're sitting
on, everything out here
is brought to life
in our imagination,
and we always have
a choice in how
we're going to view
things out here.
If we look at it from
this perspective,
let's label this way
fear, and let's look at it
this way and label it love.
These are the two choices
that we make millions of times
a day.
Every time we look at any
person, place, or thing,
we're deciding if we're going
to put love into the situation
person, place, or thing or fear.
And depending upon what we
project, the Golden Rule says,
is what we're going to get back.
And the idea is that if we can
project love into our world,
it's going to create a better
frequency for us, a better
vibration.
But also, it holds open a
very powerful promise as well,
and that is is that if we
can focus on love, then
our 3D world becomes
the inner core
of a multi-dimensional
world, symbolized
by the tesseract, where now we
can interact with beings coming
and going from other
dimensions as well as energies
from those other dimensions.
And to me, that's
an important key
to how we open up to the
divine energy of the icons.
This alchemical mindset was
adopted by the icon makers,
especially of the
14th to 17th century.
And these images were
designed not to just
help early Christians to teach
about the Transfiguration
through pretty pictures,
but, more importantly,
to encourage them to reshape
their lives in accordance
with the hope or expectation
of transforming into light,
something that our
culture is beginning
to support and embrace.
So that is the value
of these images,
and, strange as it may
sound to our sensibilities,
this is how devotees
used icons to do
the great work, the
alchemy of the soul.
So in closing, let's
just think about this,
that through contemplation,
meditation, and reflection
on these icons, we can begin
to reflect the divine light
and love experienced by Jesus
in our lives and in our world.
And now, in this segment
of "Beyond the Veil,"
Clare's going to show us how
other ancient cultures tapped
the power of sacred
images for transformation.
>> CLARE: Early Christians were
divine alchemists who adopted
the concept that the icon
stood in for an angel or deity.
Worshippers prayed in front
of panel icon in their homes
as well as in their churches.
They were taught that the icon
was a door between this world
and the world of spirit.
In this segment of
"Beyond the Veil,"
we will see how this belief
is shared by other traditions.
Let us begin with the Egyptians.
The idea that a viewer
can interact energetically
with an image begins in Egypt.
Mouthwatering scenes
on the temple walls
were magically
active in two ways.
They were supposed to make
permanent the action shown
being performed.
If the pharaoh offered a
loaf of bread to Osiris,
that loaf of bread
would continue
to be presented so long as
the representation belonged
in this world and in
the world of the gods.
Likewise, if one stood
before a figure of a god
and uttered his name, a
portion of the divine spirit
would animate the stone,
and the deity's attention
would be upon the
speaker, upon his actions,
and upon the hidden
thoughts of his heart.
The idea was cut and pasted
into the "Corpus Hermeticum,"
the book of Arcanum attributed
to the Egyptian god Thoth
and adopted by
earlier Christians.
The image itself will
show you the way.
So says the "Corpus Hermeticum."
The materials of
the image become
a channel between two worlds.
To an orthodox
Christian, the images
are a medium through
which the whole
may be approached
and grace channelled,
like a two-way mirror.
The icon is the real
equivalent to and venerated
with the same honor
as the gospel.
The one communicates
religious truth
through words and the
other through visible forms
and symbols.
Both equally are
modes of revelation.
The Hesychasts held that
through prayer and meditation
believers could actually come
to perceive the same divine
light that shone around Jesus
during his Transfiguration.
Meditating on images of Jesus
putting on this robe of light
actually helps us to
put it on, ourselves.
Icons make new pathways in
our lives and in our brains.
In 1995, neuroscientists made
a remarkable breakthrough
when they discovered
mirror neurons.
A mirror neuron fires when an
animal both performs an action
and when the animal observes
the same action performed
by another animal.
Thus, the neuron mirrors the
behavior of another animal
as though the observer were
itself performing the action.
Those neurons have been
directly observed in primates
and are believed to exist
in humans and in some birds.
Researchers at UCLA found
that mirror neuron cells
in the human anterior
cingulate, which normally
fire when you poke the
patient with a needle,
also known as pain
neurons, will also
fire when the patient watches
another patient being poked.
The mirror neurons,
it would seem,
dissolve the barrier
between self and others.
Neuroscientist V S
Ramachandran believes
mirror neurons are hardwired
for imitation learning.
This is the driving force
behind the great leap forward
in human evolution,
so he believes.
Because we can mirror
one another's actions,
we actually become them.
Stretched to its
limit, this says
if we mirror Jesus'
Transfiguration
through the icons, we can
duplicate his transformation.
Dr. Mario Martinez has shown
that a woman in California
exhibited the stigmata marks
after obsessively reading
about the crucifixion.
The medieval stigmatics
showed wounds
on the palm of their hands
because all the paintings,
which were based on
cultural beliefs,
showed Jesus'
wounds on the palm.
Then science showed that
Roman crucifixion specialists
bypassed the main artery
and hit a nerve in the wrist
to ensure maximum agony
that lasted for days.
More recent stigmatics
show the wounds
in the wrist because
of cultural beliefs.
We know from research
in psychoneuroimmunology
that feelings of helplessness
weaken immune function,
but that a sense of
empowerment strengthens it.
Redefining how we describe
events with labels that promote
helplessness to those
that trigger empowerment
can take a fearful reaction
and inspire an ordinary person
to perform extraordinary deeds.
As Dr. Martinez says, where the
mind goes, the biology follows.
Let's look at the case of
St. Catherine of Siena.
"I saw our Lord
fastened upon the cross,
coming down towards
me and surrounding me
with a marvellous light.
Then there came down from the
holes of his blessed wounds
five bloody beams,
which were directed
towards the same
parts of my body,
to my hands, feet,
and my heart."
This was how, according to
legend, St. Catherine of Siena
described receiving the stigmata
wounds of Jesus upon the cross.
She was praying before an icon.
The image itself transmitted
the marks as beams of light
reflected in her body.
Manetti's painting here
shows Catherine with her lily
by her side in an
ecstatic trance, supported
by a sister nun.
Beccafumi also shows Catherine
receiving the stigmata
from a beaming image
of the crucifix.
Dr. Martinez's theory
of biocognition
says we have a personal
bioinformational field which
has horizons that
can be expanded.
If you expand by interacting
with the horizons of Christ,
then you will identify with
his suffering or his love.
If it is with suffering--
and this is very rare--
you may experience the
occurrence of stigmata.
If you identify with
the path of love,
you experience healing
or special abilities
to do things or just
convey a sense of love.
Taken to the extreme,
through this process
you could transfigure
into a cosmic being.
It could be as simple as
monkey see, monkey do.
According to
Hindu-Buddhist thought,
all that we behold around
us is maya or illusion.
One means of transcending
this illusion
is named Ekagrata, in
the yogic tradition,
a one-pointedness meditation
on sacred images or objects.
When he places himself
before a sacred image,
the task of the Hindu
devotee is to recognize
the illusory division
between worshiper
and the worshipped, himself and
his god and to transcend it.
The Buddha image is the
most adorned form of purity,
be it carved or painted.
As the Buddha is displayed
in golden brilliance, made
magnificent by all
his actions, his face
emanates only compassion.
This is achieved in
a moment of samadi.
When the image and the
beholding consciousness unite,
writes Heinrich Zimmer, the goal
of sacred ritual is reached.
The believer experiences
himself as divine.
As the "Corpus Hermeticum"
says, the image
itself will show you the way.
We can indeed enter
through the image.
>> WILLIAM: I'm William Henry.
Thank you for
watching "Arcanum."
>> CLARE: And I'm Clare Henry.
See you next time.